doc: matter: Added documentation to Matter west commands (#15619)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/tools.rst

Installing the ZAP tool
=======================

> To install the ZAP tool using the recommended method, complete the following steps:

Author: Added

>    .. tab:: Automatic Installation Using the Matter west Command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab:: Automatic installation
```
The important part.

>    .. tab:: Automatic Installation Using the Matter west Command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. tab:: Automatic installation using Matter west commands
```
I don't think we use capital letters in titles.

>       You can use the Matter West command to automatically download and install the appropriate ZAP tool version dedicated to your current Matter revision.

Reviewer 2: It would be worth explaining that both `zap-gui` and `zap-generate` commands automatically install the right version of the ZAP tool in the `.zap-install` directory in the Matter repository within NCS. Then, you can use `zap-gui` as an example like you did.

      This tool checks the version of the Matter stack, which is located in the default location based on the ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` variable.
      If you wish to install the ZAP tool for a different Matter version, provide the path to the desired Matter SDK location using the ``-m`` or ``--matter-path`` command argument.

      To install the ZAP tool according to the default Matter SDK location, use the following command:

      .. code-block:: console

         west zap-gui

      To install the ZAP tool for a specific Matter version, use the following command and specify the *path_to_Matter_SDK*:

      .. code-block:: console

>          west zap-gui -m <path_to_Matter_SDK>

Reviewer 2: This feature is mostly relevant when using Matter in the upstream and less when using Matter in NCS, so it could be added as a `.. note::`.

Author: Added a note, but I guess it is the other way around, because it is more relevant in Matter in NCS rather than Matter in Upstream, right?

Reviewer 2: I mean this parameter is only needed when using Matter in upstream.

Author: I thought it in a different way, because I thought that somebody may have several copies of sdk-connectedhomeip repos in different places and revisions on their PC, and not especially matter upstream :) but that's right, one of the case is when somebody wants to use Matter upstream repo and west commands. I will change this sentence to explain it better.

Reviewer 2: If one has several NCS installations, one can choose the one using ZEPHYR_BASE, in which case the proper sdk-connectedhomeip will be selected automatically. That's why I thought describing `-m` parameter is only important for the upstream development use case.

Author: That's right, that convinces me :D

Author: I changed it as @wiba-nordic suggested, I think that keeping it simple is a good way.

>       Afterward, you can close the ZAP tool GUI window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      After the installation is done, you can close the ZAP tool GUI window.
```

>       Afterward, you can close the ZAP tool GUI window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Afterwards, you can close the ZAP tool GUI window.
```

      To read more about Matter west command see the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands` user guide.

>    .. tab:: Alternative methods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. tab:: Manual installation
```

      You can also install the ZAP tool using one of the following methods:

      * Download the ZAP tool package in a compatible version manually from the Assets section in `ZCL Advanced Platform releases`_.
      * Configure the tool and manually compile it using the instructions in the official `ZCL Advanced Platform`_ documentation.

>       Both these methods still require adding the ZAP tool location to the system :envvar:`PATH` environment variables, as detailed in the step 3 above.

Reviewer 2: There's no step 3 anymore.

..

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands:

Matter west commands
********************

Matter west commands are a set of commands dedicated for Matter-related purposes and integrated with the :ref:`zephyr:west`.
You can use them to simplify work with the Matter application project.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool:

ZAP tool west commands
======================

To simplify work with the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_zap`, there are two commands implemented within the Matter west commands set:

* **zap-gui**
* **zap-generate**

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui:

ZAP gui command

> ---------------

Author: Ok, let's see :)

The ZAP tool GUI is a Node.js application used to configure the data model of a Matter application.
It allows you to define endpoints, clusters, commands, attributes, and events for a specific application.
This command installs the appropriate version of the ZAP tool on your host machine and launches the ZAP tool GUI.

By default, this command looks for a :file:`.zap` file in the current directory.

> If your console is directed to a different directory than the one shown in the example, you must explicitly specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file as an additional argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the `-z` argument.
```
"If your console is directed" is a bit unclear to me so it's better to keep it simple :)

Reviewer: I like that simplification.

Installing the ZAP tool
=======================

You can install the ZAP tool either automatically or manually:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Automatic installation

>       You can use the Matter West command to automatically download and install the appropriate ZAP tool version dedicated to your current Matter revision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      You can use the Matter west commands to automatically download and install the appropriate ZAP tool version dedicated to your current Matter revision.
```

      This tool checks the version of the Matter stack, which is located in the default location based on the ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` variable.
      The ``zap-gui`` and ``zap-generate`` commands automatically install the right version of the ZAP tool in the ``.zap-install`` directory within the |NCS|.
      After the first installation, if the version of the Matter SDK did not change, the installed version will be used for all command invocations.

      To install the ZAP tool according to the default Matter SDK location, use the following command:

      .. code-block:: console

         west zap-gui

      If you need to install the ZAP tool for a specific Matter version, provide the path to the desired Matter SDK location using the ``-m`` or ``--matter-path`` command argument and specify the *path_to_Matter_SDK*:

      .. code-block:: console

         west zap-gui -m <path_to_Matter_SDK>

      .. note::

>          Providing a path to an incompatible version of the Matter SDK may cause unpredictable errors.

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure what it means. Incompatible with what?

>          Providing a path to an incompatible version of the Matter SDK with the |NCS| revision may cause unpredictable errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         Providing a path to a version of the Matter SDK that is incompatible with the |NCS| revision may cause unpredictable errors.
```

      After the installation is done, you can close the ZAP tool GUI window.

>       To read more about Matter west command, see the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands` section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      To read more about Matter west commands, see the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands` section.
```

   .. tab:: Manual installation

      You can manually install the ZAP tool using one of the following methods:

      * Download the ZAP tool package in a compatible version manually from the Assets section in `ZCL Advanced Platform releases`_.
      * Configure the tool and manually compile it using the instructions in the official `ZCL Advanced Platform`_ documentation.

      Both of these methods require you to add the ZAP tool location to the system :envvar:`PATH` environment variables.

..

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands:

Matter west commands
********************

Matter west commands are a set of commands dedicated for Matter-related purposes and integrated with :ref:`zephyr:west`.
You can use them to simplify work with the Matter application project.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool:

ZAP tool west commands
======================

To simplify work with the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_zap`, there are two commands implemented within the Matter west commands set:

* ``zap-gui``
* ``zap-generate``

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, both commands look for a :file:`.zap` file in the current directory.
You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly.
```
Moving this information here, so it doesn't need to be at the start of both commands as well as in the listed arguments.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui:

``zap-gui`` command
-------------------

ZAP tool GUI is a Node.js application used to configure the data model of a Matter application.
It allows you to define endpoints, clusters, commands, attributes, and events for a specific application.
The ``zap-gui`` command installs the appropriate version of the ZAP tool on your host machine and launches the ZAP tool GUI.

> You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the ``-z`` argument.
> Additionally, you can also specify the path to the :file:`zcl.json` file that contains the database for all possible Matter data model values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This information is better articulated in the list of possible arguments.

This is the base command invocation:

.. code-block:: console

   west zap-gui

You can use the following optional arguments:

* ``-z`` or ``--zap-file`` to provide a path to the :file:`.zap` file.
  Use this option if you invoke the ``zap-gui`` command outside the project directory.

* ``-j`` or ``--zcl-json`` to provide a path to the data model definition file (:file:`zcl.json`).
  If the argument is not provided, the :file:`<default Matter SDK location>/src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl.json` file will be used.

* ``-m`` or ``--matter-path`` to provide a path to a different Matter SDK location than the default one.
  The command will use this path to read the required ZAP tool version.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_generate:

``zap-generate`` command
------------------------

A Matter application requires data model C++ files generated from the project :file`.zap` file.
To generate the files, you can use the ``zap-generate`` Matter west command.

> By default, this command looks for a :file:`.zap` file in the current directory.
> You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the ``-z`` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If you do not provide a specific output directory as an argument, the command will create a directory for the zap-generated files in the current directory indicated by your console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not provide an output directory as an argument, the command will create and use :file:`zap-generated/` directory within the directory containing the source :file:`.zap` file.
```
It's not in the current directory.

> If you do not provide an output directory as an argument, the command will create and use :file:`zap-generated/` directory within the directory containing the source :file:`.zap` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not provide an output directory as an argument, the command will create and use a :file:`zap-generated/` directory within the directory containing the source :file:`.zap` file.
```

      You can use the Matter West command to automatically download and install the appropriate ZAP tool version dedicated to your current Matter revision.
      Both ``zap-gui``, and ``zap-generate`` commands automatically install the right version of the ZAP tool in the ``.zap-install`` directory within the |NCS|.
      After the first installation, if the version of the Matter SDK did not change the installed version will be used for the next command invocations.
      This tool checks the version of the Matter stack, which is located in the default location based on the ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` variable.
      If you wish to install the ZAP tool for a different Matter version, provide the path to the desired Matter SDK location using the ``-m`` or ``--matter-path`` command argument.

      To install the ZAP tool according to the default Matter SDK location, use the following command:

      .. code-block:: console

         west zap-gui

      To install the ZAP tool for a specific Matter version, use the following command and specify the *path_to_Matter_SDK*:

      .. code-block:: console

         west zap-gui -m <path_to_Matter_SDK>
      
      .. note::

>          This feature is relevant using Matter in |NCS| rather than the Matter upstream repository, so providing a path to the incompatible version of the Matter SDK may cause unpredictable errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         Providing a path to an incompatible version of the Matter SDK may cause unpredictable errors.
```
I think this should be enough, we don't necessarily need to specify why the user would need to install a specific version.

      * Configure the tool and manually compile it using the instructions in the official `ZCL Advanced Platform`_ documentation.

      Both of these methods require you to add the ZAP tool location to the system :envvar:`PATH` environment variables.

..

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands:

Matter west commands
********************

Matter west commands are a set of commands dedicated for Matter-related purposes and integrated with :ref:`zephyr:west`.
You can use them to simplify work with the Matter application project.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool:

ZAP tool west commands
======================

To simplify work with the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_zap`, there are two commands implemented within the Matter west commands set:

* ``zap-gui``
* ``zap-generate``

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui:

``zap-gui`` command
-------------------

ZAP tool GUI is a Node.js application used to configure the data model of a Matter application.
It allows you to define endpoints, clusters, commands, attributes, and events for a specific application.

> The ``zap-gui`` command installs the appropriate version of the ZAP tool on your host machine and launches the ZAP tool GU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``zap-gui`` command installs the appropriate version of the ZAP tool on your host machine and launches the ZAP tool GUI.
```

> You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the `-z` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the ``-z`` argument.
```

This is the base command invocation:

.. code-block:: console

   west zap-gui

You can use the following optional arguments:

* ``-z`` or ``--zap-file`` to provide a path to the :file:`.zap` file.
  Use this option if you invoke the ``zap-gui`` command outside the project directory.

* ``-j`` or ``--zcl-json`` to provide a path to the data model definition file (:file:`zcl.json`).
  If the argument is not provided, the :file:`<default Matter SDK location>/src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl.json` file will be used.

* ``-m`` or ``--matter-path`` to provide a path to a different Matter SDK location than the default one.
  The command will use this path to read the required ZAP tool version.

.. _ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_generate:

``zap-generate`` command
------------------------

A Matter application requires data model C++ files generated from the project :file`.zap` file.
To generate the files, you can use the ``zap-generate`` Matter west command.

By default, this command looks for a :file:`.zap` file in the current directory.

> If your console is directed to a different directory than the one shown in the example, you must explicitly specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file as an additional argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also specify the path to the :file:`.zap` file explicitly using the ``-z`` argument.
```
